going from zero activity to just 90
minutes a week is about a 15 reduction
in all cause mortality Jesus Christ Dr
Peter attia world-renowned physician
doctor for anything performance or
longevity related he has the secret for
living a long healthy and happy life
most people listening to us are going to
die in cardiovascular disease cancer
diabetes if we want to really figure out
a way to live longer we need a totally
different Playbook how early do some of
these diseases begin the minute you're
born but we only really think about the
risk over a 10-year time Horizon as a 30
year old you don't get excited about
exercise in your sleep but there's a 400
percent higher risk of dying in the
coming year when you compare the fittest
two and a half percent to someone at the
bottom 25 in the coming year and then
once you hit the age of 65 if you fall
and you break your hip there's a 15 to
30 percent chance you will be dead
within the next 12 months really you
have to realize is you're taking this
for granted when you talk about the
deterioration of Health you have these
three categories emotional health
deterioration why have you included that
because despite being very physically
healthy I was not living a good life I
was in such an awful cycle of anger
workaholism that I don't think my
marriage would have survived I realized
I don't want to be this person and lose
my kids I don't think I could have
survived it and I'm sure many people
listening to us can relate were you able
to discover the root cause of that more
than that I was able to get rid of it
how so what you really need to do is
what are the biggest misconceptions in
your mind about weight loss I have
thought a lot about this so
Dr Peter attia he is the man that wrote
the book on how to live a long happy and
healthy life and he argues that
everything we know about health and what
that actually means health of the Mind
the body and the emotions is wrong and
outdated
he says that there's disease growing in
you and me right now
but the problem is
because we can't see it we're doing
nothing about it Dr Peter's work turns
the light on
it allows you to see
that in many cases
in action now will increase your chance
of disease and a much shorter Life by 70
percent
170 percent and in some cases if we
don't take action Now by 400 percent
I've had lots of conversations on this
podcast about health about diet about
all of these things
but for many of you
this one will be the one that changes
your life this will be the one that
makes you ask some difficult but
important questions about your health
and what health means for you I walked
away from this conversation realizing
that if I don't take action now
I'm going to be forced to take action
then
and I can unequivocally say that this
conversation has changed my life
I have a suspicion it's going to change
yours
[Music]
Peter
Dr Peter
you talk about so much in your work I've
been through every interview you've done
your book other conversations you've had
you talk about a lot so many things that
I'm absolutely fascinated by
my first question for you is
what is your mission and why are you
doing this I think that
um there is no
greater
um desire for people than to be healthy
especially when you consider how we can
define health more broadly than just
physical health wins you can include
kind of emotional health
it's kind of the great equalizer and
nothing else really matters if you don't
have it right so it doesn't really
matter if you're famous or not famous it
doesn't matter if you're rich or poor if
if your health is compromised and
anybody who's been through an illness
where their health has been compromised
I think we'll realize in a moment
what they've taken for granted and I
I've just become personally endlessly
fascinated by this topic and
in my own
quest to understand this better and
better
the next natural step was to begin to do
it as a doctor right to begin to kind of
help patients with this
and at some point
you can only treat so many people and so
podcasting and ultimately writing a book
just became a way to put as much of that
information as possible out there for
more and more people to access
do you know why U of old people became
fascinated by this was there a stuff
dominoes that fell I think so yeah I
mean I think
um
you know I'd always been interested in
performance
um because I'd always you know at least
as as far back as you know being 12 or
13 years old
you know I'd always been obsessed with
one form or another of some sort of
physical Obsession whether it be you
know boxing when I was really young or
Marathon swimming later in life
but when my daughter was born when I was
35 that
was the first time that everything kind
of pivoted and I had a little bit of a
glimpse into the future I would say and
I just sort of realized oh you know
the The Joy I'm experiencing In This
Moment is so
surprising to me so unanticipated and
I really want to be able to experience
this again
means not just with other children of
mine but potentially with grandchildren
and on top of that I had a bit of a
wake-up call which was I realized that
all the men in my family died
prematurely of heart disease obviously I
knew that fact before this time but I
think it was the Confluence of those two
things it was the realization that yeah
you know if you don't figure something
out and do something about this you're
probably going to die of heart disease
in your 60s which is not that far from
now you know 25 30 years from now and
you now really have a motivation to live
longer and to live better longer
and so that in many ways kind of began
the change in my direction my focus to
to being one that was not purely just
focused on performance anymore but sort
of focused on understanding Health in a
different way
this concept of medicine 3.0 is a
concept which I only discovered in your
work never had the time used before
um
what is medicine 3.0 and how did you get
to the point when you realized that
there needed to be an iteration on the
current system of Medicine
yeah the reason I think you hadn't heard
of it before is I don't think it's been
described before so you can't be faulted
for that
um but as I began writing the book and
thinking about how
I was practicing and how people like me
practice
I realized that it is a very distinct
change from the current form of Medicine
and in a way to not be just critical of
the current form of medicine I had to
put it in the context of what existed
even before that and that's how I sort
of realized well we're in this version
of medicine called medicine 2.0 but it's
following something called medicine 1.0
and it's an enormous Improvement above
that so maybe I can spend a moment just
kind of explaining what those three are
and I think that's probably the easiest
way to explain the current form so
um
medicine 1.0 is everything that existed
before we really understood the science
of Medicine
so for most of human history we had no
idea why people got sick or why people
died or what an infection meant and we
sort of thought that these were plagues
from the gods or things of that nature
but a couple of things happened in the
past
you know 100 few hundred years the first
was the idea of a scientific method
something that we take for granted today
where you can make an observation about
something in the world formulate a guess
called a hypothesis about why it's
happening and then design an experiment
to test it that's called the scientific
method
that's an invention that's a creation we
had to figure that out
also things like a light microscope
which you know up until 140 years ago or
so didn't exist allowed scientists and
doctors to be able to actually see these
microscopic things called bacteria and
then ultimately the development of
things like antibiotics and eventually
vaccines all of these things made an
enormous difference in reducing the
suffering and death due to what I call
in the book Fast death
so fast death is pretty much how we used
to all die
fast death would be trauma and infection
and up until
about 150 years ago life expectancy
would have been high 30s low 40s and
most of us succumbed to fast death
but with the Advent of medicine 2.0
through all those transitions I just
described
in the span of a few Generations we've
doubled life expectancy right so now
life expectancy is roughly twice what I
just said a minute ago
and most people do not die from Fast
death
but it's been supplanted by slow death
today most people listening to us are
going to die from cardiovascular disease
from cancer Dementia or other
neurodegenerative diseases complications
of diabetes
and on the one hand that's a sign of
progress it means like Hey we're living
long enough to die from those things but
we've made scant progress against those
things
in fact if you go back and
strip out the top eight causes of
infectious death or communicable death
death from communicable diseases or
infectious diseases today if you strip
them out our life expectancy is not much
better than it was in the 1800s
in other words that doubling of life
expectancy that we've experienced comes
almost exclusively to the reduction of
those fast deaths and has little to do
with any success we've had against slow
death
if we want to really figure out a way to
live longer and I would argue more
importantly live better meaning when
we're in the last Decades of our life
not be in a state of total decline we
need a totally different Playbook
and that Playbook is medicine 3.0 and it
involves real prevention so that means
taking True step steps at prevention
very early in life
it also involves being very personalized
in how you do things so it means you
can't just do paint by numbers you can't
just sort of say the same thing to
everybody
clearly there are certain things that
make absolute sense across the board
such as sleep and exercise you know but
the way you might use medications is
going to have to be much more tailored
to an individual
you say that there are there are four
points to Medicine 3.0 which is the
prevention the being unique in your
treatment
um to each individual an honest
assessment and acceptance of risk yeah
one of the things that I don't think we
think enough about as doctors sometimes
is is risk right now I think doctors are
very good at thinking about the risk of
doing something yeah
um I think you know usually a doctor is
pretty good at understanding you know if
you have this surgical procedure there's
a risk of an infection there's a risk of
bleeding there's a risk of all these
things if you take this medicine there's
a risk of this side effect or that side
effect
but I don't think we spend enough time
thinking about the risk of not acting or
the risk of not acting when we do
so this is where I think it gets a bit
more nuanced
um
prevention doesn't come without risk
right I mean you're still going to have
to do something in in the state of
prevention
um so the question is understanding the
time Horizon upon which you're
considering risk
so I'll give you one very specific
example
um
at least in the U.S and it might be the
same in the UK
um
we only really think about the risk of
heart disease over a 10-year time
Horizon so look at someone like you
you're 30 years old right so
what is your 10-year risk of having a
heart attack
I can tell you without knowing anything
about you it's really low good it's as
close to zero as we could have in
medicine
but what if I did a blood test on you
and I found biomarkers in there that
were predictive of very high risk later
in life
now that would be actually quite
possible there's there's about a one in
ten chance you might have a biomarker
called LP little a for example which is
just a certain lipid in your body about
a one in ten chance you have that
dramatically increases your risk of
cardiovascular disease my uncle died
very early I believe in his 50s of a
cardiovascular disease interesting
so knowing that by the way could be
helpful because that would prompt me to
ask you more questions and want to know
more about all the people in your family
so here we have a 1 in 10 chance and by
the way we wouldn't leave it to chance
we would just check it and we let's say
we checked your level and you had that
you had that lipoprotein or you had an
elevated level of another lipoprotein
APO lipoprotein little B and again these
are kind of technical terms but they're
very common things and they're easy to
measure
the medicine 2.0 view here would be well
there's nothing wrong with you now and
there's not going to be anything wrong
with you for the next 10 years
we don't need to do anything about it
conversely if I take a lifetime view of
risk I would say
yeah but the risk to something happening
in the next 40 years is actually quite
significant
so my risk of doing nothing is probably
much higher than my risk of doing
something today so my risk of doing
something today would be non-zero but
small but my risk of doing nothing if I
take the appropriate time Horizon is
much bigger this is one of the things in
your book that really really got me
thinking was I have to say and I believe
a lot of people probably feel the same
way I've gone through my life thinking
to some degree I'll worry about avoiding
these diseases later I'll I'll when I
get to 45 then I'll start taking this
thing seriously because then I'm getting
into that territory where most people I
know that get cancer or Alzheimer's or
all of these cardiovascular things
that's when it tends to happen so I'll
think about it then
totally understandable
um and I'll frame this in the context of
a question I get asked all the time
which is hey Peter when is the best time
to start thinking about this stuff
and I say look I can't answer that
because there are two competing issues
that are crossing
when I meet somebody who's in the last
decade of their life
do you know how much they are thinking
about this like it's all they're
thinking about
it's all they're thinking about every
minute of every day is a confrontation
with their own mortality
the problem is
they don't have much time
to change the direction of the ship you
may recall in the book I write the sort
of I use the metaphor of the Titanic
right
it's not that the Titanic didn't see the
iceberg it's that it didn't see the
iceberg in time it didn't have enough
Runway to really move out of the way and
that's why the Titanic gashed the side
of the boat
now at the other end of the spectrum a
30 year old like you has unbelievable
potential to change the Arc of your life
you have so much runway to
through manipulating nutrition and
exercise and sleep and stress and all of
these things to completely alter the to
the disease trajectory of your life
the problem is and I'm not just speaking
to you personally but more broadly to
someone who's as young as you it's
harder to find the motivation because
there are no reminders of your own
mortality you're Superman
right the worst thing that happens to
you is a hangover so I always get asked
like when is the right time to start
worrying about this and the short answer
is look as soon as possible but then
there's a reality that says for most
people it's not until they're in their
40s
maybe once they have kids that they
start to appreciate their own mortality
and that that provides some of the
motivation
to say you know
maybe I'll be a little less focused on
optimizing everything for today
and I'll start thinking a little bit
about tomorrow so again another way to
think about this is saving for
retirement
a lot of people in their 20s and 30s who
are making good money aren't necessarily
taking the most prudent Financial steps
to ensure Financial Freedom when they're
in their 70s
because let's be honest it's more
enjoyable to spend money today than to
set some of it aside
but there are a lot of people later in
life who think I wish I was a little bit
more responsible earlier on how early do
some of these disease if you looked at
my sort of metabolic health or if you
were able to look inside my body which
I'm sure you're able to do how early do
some of these diseases begin
in my in my life at what age do you see
some of these things coming yeah it's
super interesting because
there are some elements of you as a
person that are going downhill the
minute you're born
and there are others that are not so
let's let's use two examples
let's start with something where your
body is getting better and better and
um you know you're probably only peaking
now but you haven't really started to
age
um your muscle quality okay so when you
were five years old
your muscle quality was nothing like it
is today
but as you enter your 20s the quality of
those muscle fibers these type two one
these type 1 and type 2 muscle fibers so
these are kind of slow to fatigue but
high endurance fibers are the type one
fibers the type two fibers are very very
powerful but they're kind of quick to
fatigue the quality of both of those
fibers is very high and the more you
train them the higher quality they will
be
but as you enter your 30s you will now
start to experience a shrinkage of those
type 2 muscle fibers you will be less
powerful in your 30s in your late 30s
especially than you were in your mid to
late 20s so that's a form of Aging you
are declining it's not an accident that
the most powerful athletes in the world
are at their peak in their late 20s and
early 30s so sprinters for example
that's a prime example of a pure pure
Power Sport
um
we look at other things like more of
your muscular endurance that will Peak
even a little bit later you can keep
that going a little bit later
we look at certain forms of cognition so
if we look at something called fluid
intelligence right this is raw
horsepower processing speed you have
more of it right now than I do meaning
you're going to have faster processing
speed better memory all of these things
are going to be better when you're 30
than at my age I'm 50. because that's
already started to decline in me
there are some things however that began
Aging in you the minute you were born
and one of them is actually going back
to this idea of atherosclerosis or
cardiovascular disease well that's an
example of a disease process that begins
right away at Birth and even though it
almost never rears its head as far as
death before you're 50 make no mistake
about it it's starting on day one
and we know this by the way because when
we look at studies of people who die for
completely unrelated reasons so somebody
who you know dies in a car accident or
soldiers dying in war and we look at
their the arteries of their heart we
already see quite Advanced disease so
the truth of it is you already have
pretty significant disease in your
coronary arteries it hasn't risen to the
level of ever causing a heart attack and
it's unlikely to do so for another 20
years maybe even another 30 years but
it's compounding it is compounding
exactly and if you want to live to be 90
free of cardiovascular disease it makes
a big difference if you can slow it down
when you're in your 20s and 30s
interesting
that's really what I'm trying to change
in myself is I'm trying to find the
motivation like you said when we're not
confronted with our mortality it's
interesting because my life changed
because of the pandemic in part because
I got to see
um the relationship between
things like obesity poor metabolic
health and mortality for the first time
and that's really when I started working
out every pretty much every day now it
was three years ago in
March 2020 2020 when I was watching the
TV and it was that confrontation of like
oh my God the reason why I'm having a
better outcome with this disease is
because I'm in better metabolic Health
metabolic shape and it's funny that it
has to take those things in our lives
for us to make the changes quick one
before we get back to this episode just
give me 30 seconds of your time
two things I wanted to say the first
thing is a huge thank you for listening
and tuning in to the show week after
week means the world to all of us and
this really is a dream that we
absolutely never had and couldn't have
imagined getting to this place
secondly it's a dream where we feel like
we're only just getting started and if
you enjoy what we do here please join
the 24 of people who watch this channel
regularly and have hit the Subscribe
button means more than I can say and if
you hit that subscribe button here's a
promise I'm gonna make to you I'm gonna
do everything in my power to make this
show as good as I can now and into the
future we're going to deliver the guests
that you want me to speak to and we're
going to continue to keep doing all of
the things you love about the show
thank you thank you so much back to the
episode when you talk about the
deterioration of Health you have these
three categories cognitive decline
um decline in loss and function of our
physical body and then emotional health
deterioration why emotional health
deterioration
why why have I included that yeah why
have you included that well I mean maybe
I'll just take a step back and say where
I kind of put these all in perspective
so
you know the the title of the book right
is outlive the science and art of
longevity and what is longevity well
longevity is really about two things
it's about the length of life
and the word for that is lifespan but
it's about the quality of life and the
word for that is Health span and it's
Health span that has those three
components you just described Health
span meaning quality of life is
determined by your cognitive function so
what's your processing speed what's your
executive function what's your memory
all of these things it's determined by
your physical health
how much strength do you have are you
free from Pain how much endurance do you
have what what capacity do you have to
do whatever you want to do physically
are you Limited in any way by pain
strength movement balance
Etc and then the final piece is
emotional health what's the state of
your relationships are you do you have
joy in your life do you have a sense of
purpose are you happy
um not all the time right do but do you
have the capacity to regulate your
emotions and so now to answer your
question why would that be included well
the truth of the matter is it wasn't
something I always included right it
wasn't something I necessarily thought
much about
until it was I think very starkly
pointed out to me by a very astute
therapist who
in observing my own struggles in life
said something to the effect of isn't it
really ironic that you are putting so
much energy into
helping people live longer and yet you
are paying no attention to your own
misery
and I think that was you know and that
was about six years ago and that was
kind of when I realized I needed to
rethink my approach to this problem and
as I write about in the book I think I
would make the case today that if your
emotional health is suffering none of
the others really matter that much
so what you really need to do is think
about a way to have all of these things
in order what does she mean by your own
misery
well I mean I think at that point in my
life I mean
I there's there's no two ways about it I
mean I was just incredibly miserable
incredibly angry
um despite being very physically healthy
right despite doing all of the important
things to be physically healthy right
exercising uh you know
in all the right ways eating well
sleeping well optimizing every aspect of
my health but but living living a bad
life
what were the symptoms of that what were
the kind of for you to start to spot
that because sometimes we don't know in
our own behavior and sometimes it's
reflected back on from other people
we'll get feedback from our wife or our
girlfriend yeah I mean
Detachment from others
um
prone to anger workaholism selfishness
you know it wasn't it wasn't subtle it
wasn't like hmm I wonder if you know I'm
not being my best self no if I if I was
being honest and confronting it I was
not I was not living a good life did you
know that in the moment had I asked you
in the moment are you happy what would
you have responded
I think I would have probably said
to just that question sure
right but but I think to a deeper
prodding
um
no and and there were there were a lot
of things that happened in there but but
certainly a very powerful one was going
to the funeral of
um
a woman my age who was the mother of my
daughter's best friend
so my younger daughter's best friend her
mom died of cancer and so all the
parents you know we're at the free we're
at the funeral
and at the time I was
you know
really going through a lot of difficulty
um in my own marriage and
this woman who died was a very
successful lawyer
um really pretty remarkable
and I was
really sort of struck how at the funeral
people had the nicest things to say
about her what a beautiful mother she
was she had three kids
and
nobody talked at all about her career
like there was not a single word about
her achievements in life it was only a
discussion about the quality of her Life
as a mother
and that might sound very obvious
because when was the last time you were
at a funeral where they talked about
someone's career accolades
but that in a moment really fused
an idea from a book I had just read by a
guy named David Brooks called the road
to character
I don't have you read it
in the book David Brooks talks about
this idea of there being
um resume virtues and eulogy virtues
and I really understood in that moment
that my entire life at that moment had
been only predicated on bolsting my
resume virtues I had never spent a
moment thinking about my eulogy virtues
and at that moment to your question if
someone had asked me how is your eulogy
I would have been brutally honest and
said it is awful
there is not a single nice thing anybody
who matters about me in other words of
the people who should matter most they
won't be able to say anything nice about
me
is that painful to admit
yes it's painful to admit today and it
was painful to acknowledge then
wow I'm so impressed that you're able to
because I thinking about cognitive
dissonance and how psychologically
uncomfortable that must be to face
you hint in the book about I think it
was in the last chapter of the book you
start hinting about
the origins of that behavior the
workholism and all of those things and I
can totally relate I think I'm a total
workaholic I think I sacrifice too much
in the pursuit of like accolades
sometimes in my life everyone knows me
including these guys will all say that
about me
um and I've often tried to in hindsight
figure out where that came from in me
and undo that
it's funny because reading this book the
last chapter I actually wrote in my
notes remember I just wrote Because the
chapters called emotional health I wrote
brackets trauma and the role that trauma
plays I didn't expect to find
that subject matter in this book about
longevity
um what's your thoughts on the role
trauma plays and how we go about
understanding it so that we can live a
have a long Health span
I think there's probably a lot of people
who can relate to the stuff I write
about in the Final Chapter and you're
right that chapter is
a significant deviation from the first
16 chapters so there's 17 chapters in
the book and
I I basically make the argument that I
am the doctor for 16 of them the first
16 I'm talking about this
as though I'm the doctor you're the
patient I'm going to help you and this
is how to do all this stuff and then in
the Final Chapter I'm saying actually
now I'm the patient and I'm going to
kind of walk you through this journey
I've had and hope that it basically
motivates each of you to have a similar
examination of yourselves
and um
I I think that many people I can't tell
you what fraction of people but I think
many people have maladaptive behaviors
in their life that are indirectly or
directly the response to
something that we would Define as trauma
and and Trauma is a very vast uh concept
right I think it's very easy when you
hear the word trauma to think of abuse
and you know that can be physical abuse
sexual abuse spiritual abuse these
things like that and it's true I did
experience abuse in my life
um
but trauma can be much more than that
trauma can be abandonment uh enmeshment
witnessing tragic things so there are
lots of things that are traumatic I
discussed them in the book and
what happens to children who are
traumatized and it can also happen to
adults but I think most often the
formative years of our lives are when
these things happen
is we we adapt and I think that's the
kind of remarkable thing about us is how
adaptive we are
and those adaptations
can often be very positive
but a lot of times they have negative
collateral or maladaptive
consequences in addition
and some of those adaptations that are
negative are addictions some of them are
other maladaptive behaviors like anger
some of them include you know things
like codependencies so you can sort of
look at people and realize that hey you
know maybe that person who grew up in
the home of Alcoholics even if
it was an otherwise reasonably
well-meaning home and it's not like they
were getting hit with a belt buckle
every night but they weren't getting the
type of attention that they needed
and their adaptation was to have an
attachment disorder that wouldn't
manifest itself really fully until they
were apparent so
this this type of analysis really I
think everybody needs to spend some time
thinking about it and needs to spend
some time asking themselves hey which of
my behaviors are maladaptive and it's
something that's done and I think it
needs to be done without judgment this
isn't about saying I'm a bad person
because of X Y and Z even though I think
I can objectively look back at my own
behaviors at that time in my life and
say those are awful behaviors I'm not
proud of those behaviors but it's
separating the behavior from the self
it's not saying I'm a horrible human
it's saying I'm a human who did horrible
things and I want to understand why I
love that approach because I think about
the maladaptive Behavior patterns I had
that stood in the chance stood stood in
the way of my chance of emotional health
and good relationships and a lot of
those stem back to my childhood and
um what I witnessed in my home and then
distort the way that made me adapt and
the beliefs it gave me about romantic
relationships for example so I became
totally avoidant of those until later in
my life when I realized this pattern
um the third point in your in your list
of things that
cause sort of I guess longevity of one's
Health span is that emotional health
deterioration so before we get into the
other two my question really was on that
third point of emotional health
what for you has helped you to
um self-analyze and become aware and to
then get those things out of your way
that stand a chance of
costing you your emotional health was it
therapy was it introspection is it
journaling is it honesty with oneself
well I mean in my case I think the
situation was so far gone that I
actually had to go away
on two occasions
um so I I had to go away in uh in it the
first time for two weeks uh to an
inpatient like what's called a
residential care facility which was two
weeks of
like 14 straight days of 14 hours a day
just doing trauma therapy in group and
individually
and uh you know two weeks might not
sound like a long time but boy that was
about the most
brutal exhausting thing I'd ever done in
my life
and then again
I had to do it for three weeks at a
different facility so again 21 days of
inpatient treatment but also now really
learning what the tools were to manage
myself how do I fix that behavior how do
I how do I manage it so sort of like you
have an injury you go to rehab you know
there's an acute healing phase but then
there's a well now you want to make sure
you're strong and that you don't injure
it again because that injury took place
because of some weakness and and that's
not not a Perfect Analogy but the point
is you know there's a reason that you're
shoulder separated yeah and we want to
make sure it doesn't happen again even
once you're better and you sent yourself
there twice yes and no I mean truthfully
I don't think I had a choice I don't
think my I don't think my marriage would
have survived so I I think it was
um
I'm not sure I had a choice truthfully
so I went very reluctantly
I did not want to go
but it was there was a an ultimatum
essentially yeah
wow
what was the greatest sort of gift that
process gave you
oh it gave me my life
I mean it literally saved my life really
for sure
how
well I don't think
I don't think I would I just don't think
I'd be alive today without it right I
think had I lost I mean I was on such a
I was on I was in such an awful cycle of
Shame and self-loathing and
deterioration that
I don't think I could have survived it
so was that that was a narrative in your
head at the time that you when you talk
about shame and self-loathing that's
what the the voice in your head was
yeah the the voice is
you are an awful human being that's why
you behave this way and
there's nothing that can be done about
it you you're born this way you you are
defective
and this is what defective people do
look in many ways it's a lack of
accountability right
it's sort of saying
you have no agency in this
you you can't change this because you
are you're defective when they do an
autopsy on you they will see something
in the temporal lobe of your brain that
explains your pathology
were you able to discover the root cause
of that narrative in your head
yes absolutely
and and more than that I was able to get
rid of it really yeah
I'll give you one very tangible example
I had
a very very vocal inner critic
um and I think I'm sure many people
listening to us can relate to that which
is you know I was such a perfectionist I
was such a workaholic
but any mistake I made I would
eviscerate myself verbally
so and this was I mean this is mistakes
that don't matter okay so one of my
hobbies is archery I love archery so
every day almost every day certainly if
I'm not traveling I'm going to be out in
the backyard shooting my bow and arrow
now does anybody else care
nobody right is this my livelihood
depend on this no
but if I'm not shooting well
I am screaming at myself
I will break an arrow over my thigh and
these are carbon arrows they'll leave
welts the size of your finger
one of the exercises we had to do
was
and this was once I left the second
therapy place that was three weeks
so the one of the big realizations there
was that this was happening because that
voice like I didn't realize that that
was unusual
so the exercise was
every single day until this voice goes
away
which I thought would never happen which
meant I thought I was signing up to do
this exercise for the rest of my life
you take out your phone
and you talk into the phone with a
replacement voice for that voice
and pretend you're talking to your
closest friend as if it were them who
made the mistake
and I say
hey Chris
I know you're having a bad day today
I can tell it's hard you're not shooting
well
it's okay
you know what some days it's just not
going to go well
plus it is a little windy today let's be
honest it makes it a bit harder and
why don't we just pack it up and come
back and try again tomorrow you know
just talk in a kind way talk in the way
you would literally speak to your friend
and then I would send that recording to
my therapist
so every day my therapist is getting
multiple versions of these voicemails
but this is important because I'm
audibly doing this
multiple times a day
and
within about four months
The Voice just went away really yeah
let's never come back
how has it changed you as a father oh my
God it's a it's a it's a it hasn't
changed me as a person right as a father
as a husband as as a boss as a friend I
mean it's it's just
um again it makes me a little sad to
think oh God I wish I knew this when I
was I wish I wish I did this at 25 you
know instead of
all of this
again I just think of all of the
collateral damage in my life
you know all of the people near me who
have suffered
unnecessarily as a result of
you know
of of of of me being a wrecking ball
um how much of that could have been
prevented in some ways this kind of
comes back to your very first question
right which is I'm 30 I'm Invincible how
do I get excited about this look maybe
the answer is as a 30 year old you don't
need to get excited about
you know
your nutrition and exercise in your
sleep as much as a 50 year old does but
a there's a lot of benefit to doing so
because you'll get more benefit from it
but maybe it's just focusing on
emotional health so that you get
yourself fixed before you start a family
because I think you know and and I think
you know I feel lucky I think my kids
are still young enough I hope that my
kids don't have too many memories of
their of their dad in that in that state
your belief about where that came from
although there's no evidence there's no
memory of anyone you know saying well
this happened and whatever else but
is your belief that you weren't born
with that and that something might have
happened and you've kind of inferred
that in some way
yes I think that was a really really
important breakthrough that happened
on the 19th day of that second stint I
had in therapy in that inpatient therapy
session so that was a 21
Day program
that I assumed was only going to be 14
days and at the end of 14 days they they
needed me to they wanted me to stay
another week everybody wanted me to stay
another seven days and I was so
reluctant at this point I was exhausted
I just didn't think I could do it again
but they were adamant that I stay
another week and I knew the first time I
had gone for two weeks and left I left
kind of against their recommendations
and I realized I never really got fully
better I got somewhat better but not
fully better so I decided
to just submit to them and say okay fine
I will stay as long as you tell me to
and it was on that 19th day that I had
perhaps the single most important
Revelation for me again this is very
personal and
the point of this is not that everybody
else is going to relate to this it's
only that I hope everybody else is
willing to consider their own version of
this
but what I the the last thing I could
never let go of was
that
I was born as a perfect child right like
meaning we all are right not just me but
all of these kind of maladaptive
behaviors were the result of things that
I didn't deserve
and
again it's not all
what we call Capital T dramas it's not
it's not necessarily the abuse I mean I
think in my case perhaps the most
impactful things of my childhood were
were more like neglect
and not not traumatic not like the kind
of neglect that's gonna that has you you
should be taken out of a house or
anything like that I'm just talking
about not getting a certain type of
attention
that I probably should have had
and for whatever reason that
manifested itself in really odd
behaviors that as a kid I just said
those are just bad behaviors but that's
just who I was and I think what I
realized is
and what I finally came to accept is no
those are adaptations to something that
you didn't deserve
and that might sound like a very subtle
distinction but it made all the
difference in the world and it made me
realize in part by it by looking at my
own kids that
you know there is a real innocence to
children that can very easily get
injured and and and when it does they're
going to make sure that they don't get
hurt again
and and the way they're going to do that
is as I said initially in their best
interest but ultimately it tends to
result in really negative consequences
for the way they formulate relationships
with themselves with for the way they
form relationships with others for the
way they're going to parent for the way
they're going to be a husband or wife
um
and so that was that was a huge
breakthrough
so important and so powerful and I I
don't I don't think I've ever said this
but really thank you for sharing that
because
um I got a lot from it and I've had lots
of conversations about this but I've got
a lot from that specifically that point
about
um didn't deserve for it to happen and
really it's a response that's trying to
make sure you don't experience that pain
again so it's really again it's your
body is is doing everything in its power
to help you and to protect you and some
of these behaviors end up being
maladaptive which then stand in the way
of your chance of emotional health
that is the third category of
deterioration which is the emotional
health deterioration
so let's go a little bit earlier in the
book and let's talk about the decline
and the loss of function of our physical
bodies as well
um medicine 3.0 as we talked about
earlier you talk about these five core
things that help to increase our chances
of longevity as it relates to our health
spans what are those five things well
there's the one we just talked about
right so all the tools that deal with
how do you improve your emotional health
yeah again most of modern medicine only
thinks about you know if you think about
where does medicine 2.0 rank on that it
doesn't really except in the arena of
mental health right when it comes to
clinical depression anxiety personality
disorders you know bipolar disorder
there we have a branch of medicine
called Psychiatry that deals with those
things but outside of that medicine
doesn't really deal with people like me
you know I none of my problems quote
unquote Rose to the level of you know a
clinical diagnosis that would require
medical therapy okay tool two exercise
again we can talk a lot about it if you
want a little about it but the point is
it is not remotely given anything beyond
lip service by medicine 2.0 medicine you
know if you go to your doctor here at
the NHS and say okay tell me what my
workouts should be
like good luck right how much time
should I be spending in zone two versus
zone five like what type of lifting
should I mean there's no way they're
going to give you that type of insight
or specificity uh the third one is
nutrition again sure every doctor is
going to tell you eat less exercise more
but they're not really for the most part
going to be able to help you manage
nutrition certainly I didn't learn
anything about nutrition or exercise
when I was going through my medical
training and most Physicians don't so
I'm not saying that there aren't doctors
out there who don't understand these
things what I'm going to say is they had
to learn that stuff on their own outside
of their traditional training so crazy
the fourth one is sleep and that fits in
the same category
sleep is an essential pillar of Health
but we learn nothing about it in our
medical training in fact most of our
medical training is paradoxically sleep
deprived so it's sort of it's a great
irony the fifth and final thing that you
have as a tool in the longevity toolkit
is is all the molecules so drugs hormone
supplements and there that's the one
thing you sort of do learn in
traditional medicine is you you at least
learn about the the pharmacologic side
of it you don't really learn anything
about supplements so most doctors don't
really understand much about supplements
and interestingly most doctors don't
really understand a lot about hormones
as well
so medicine 2.0 is is good at what it
does but it's very limited so it's kind
of like having a contractor that only
has one tool instead of five tools and
as we discussed earlier I think they're
applying those tools too late in the
game how can you prove let's start with
exercise then how can you prove to me
that exercise is important
yeah it's a great question so start with
the easiest way to do this is to look at
what the absence of exercise does versus
looking at the absence or presence of
other known bad things
now for me to explain this I have to
explain a technical term called a hazard
ratio
so if you'll bear with me while I
explain what a hazard ratio is it will
reap lots of fruit later on
a hazard ratio is a mathematical
derivation that comes from looking at a
group of people following them
prospectively following them into the
future and looking at the rate at which
they die
so a hazard ratio is a number
if that number is 1.5
it means that there's a 50 percent
increase in the risk of death for one
group versus the other so for example
if we want to know is smoking bad for
you
we might ask the question what is the
hazard ratio for smokers to non-smokers
when it comes to getting lung cancer
okay and the answer is like 10. really
it's 10 times more about 10 times more
likely to get lung cancer if you're a
smoker than if you're a non-smoker
now if you look at the hazard ratio
across the course of life
for all causes of death it's about 1.5
meaning a smoker is about 50 percent
more likely to die in any given year
than a non-smoker which will all cause
mortality all cause mortality is the
gold standard for understanding death
and disease because it takes into
account every form of death okay okay
what if you have type 2 diabetes
everybody understands that having type 2
diabetes is very problematic and people
with type 2 diabetes are at about twice
the risk more or less of cancer heart
disease maybe one and a half times the
risk of Alzheimer's disease but when it
comes to all cause mortality every cause
of death it's about a 1.4 Hazard ratio
40 out of 40 percent increase in all
cause mortality again that's a stark
number it means at any moment in time if
you take two people who are ever and
otherwise always identical but one has
Type 2 diabetes and one doesn't this
person has a 40 higher risk of dying in
the coming year in the coming year yeah
Jesus Christ yeah wow okay we can keep
doing this what if it's high blood
pressure versus normal blood pressure
that's a hazard ratio of about 1.2
20 percent same everything I just said
but it's twenty percent
okay what if it's someone
who has end-stage kidney disease their
kidneys don't work anymore they're on
dialysis hanging by a thread waiting for
a kidney transplant
it's about 2.7
that's a
170 percent increase in all cause
mortality in the subsequent year
okay
now let's talk about some other things
what if I ask the question what happens
if I take
a group of 50 year olds pick any age
pick any sex and we're going to take the
top
15 to 20 percent in strength and compare
them to the bottom 15 to 20 in strength
for that age and sex what's the
difference what's the hazard ratio there
what would your guess be uh
1.1 to 1.2 yeah yeah it's three two
hundred percent difference in all cause
mortality can you make a distinction
between strength and
muscle mass okay yep we can do it so
muscle mass just if we did it just on
muscle mass it's about two or a 100
difference so muscle mass turns out to
be an amazing proxy for strength but
strength is even better okay yep so high
strength and high muscle mass produce a
hazard ratio of about 3.5 okay because
you can have a lot of muscles but not be
strong yeah kind of and you can be
strong and have not as much muscle okay
and that matters more by the way but but
they're pretty tightly correlated okay
yeah now let's look at VO2 max so VO2
max is the best tool we have to measure
Peak cardiorespiratory Fitness so this
is a test that you actually have to take
it's it's done on a treadmill or on a
bike they put a mask on your face and
then the mask measures how much oxygen
you use
so in the book I talk in great detail
about this test it's something anybody
can do it costs probably 100 quid it's
not like super expensive
um and everybody should know their VO2
max I really think everybody should know
it and in the book I even offer some
ways that you can estimate it just by
running at a track or something like
that so sorry it's the the measure of
how much oxygen you're inhaling and
exhaling no yeah it's the difference
between how much you inhale and exhale
is how much you're using so the way that
the way the test is working is there's a
little oxygen sensor so if you're
breathing in we know that the air you're
breathing in is 21 oxygen we know the
flow rate and we let's just say you're
you're blowing it out at 14 so we know
you used up seven percent times the flow
rate we figure out how many liters per
minute of oxygen you're using at the max
and what's good and what's bad
yeah so it depends on your age and sex
but at your age so for a 30 year old
male we would say
oh I need the table is in the book
um really I could estimate it 60 50
56 would put you in the top two and a
half percent and that means that I'm oh
sorry what's that number mean yeah
that's 56 milliliters of oxygen per
kilogram of body weight per minute okay
so
I think I'm 96 kilograms at the moment
okay very heavy so you would need to be
5.3 5.4 5.5 liters yeah no no yeah you
need to be about 5.5 liters per minute
you would need to consume 5.5 liters of
oxygen per minute to come out to about a
VO2 max of 56 or 57 milliliters of
oxygen per kilogram per minute that
would put you at the top two and a half
percent for your age and sex so I'm
going to figure out is taking more
oxygen from the air that I breathe a
sign of good health yes it means it's it
speaks to how hard how fast and hard
your heart can pump yeah and how good
your muscles are at utilizing oxygen ah
okay it is the most important metric we
have for Peak cardiorespiratory Fitness
and sorry for getting a bit too big
because I really want to understand this
and I'm sure there's a lot of people
trying to understand this as well so
what are the things that stand in the
way of good VO2 max
in terms of my and also the the lungs
yeah it turns out that not much of it is
limited by the lungs so the question is
where are you limited okay okay so how
does this test work
do you prefer to run or bike I prefer to
bike okay so we're going to put you on a
bike we're gonna put this mask on your
face that allows no other air in or out
it's only going to be metered by what's
coming from the machine the bike is
going to be
um one that has forced resistance to it
it's called an ergometer so we're going
to set it to 100 Watts nice and easy I'm
going to tell you to warm up for a while
and then after a 10 minute warm-up it's
going to start increasing the power
that's that you are forced to Pedal
against okay and every two minutes we're
going to add some amount 25 or 50 Watts
and and you're going to say you have to
stay above about 70 rpm
and this test is going to go until you
can't do it anymore
it's going to go till you basically drop
so what's limiting you is clearly not
the amount of oxygen in the air
and it's actually not the ability of
your lungs to get oxygen into your blood
you're limited by the how hard and fast
your heart can pump that blood through
your body and how efficient your muscles
are at taking the oxygen out and using
it
and the difference between
so again a 30 year old who's in the top
two and a half percent of their age
group might be at 56 57 but to put that
in context the guy who wins the Tour de
France this year is 85. wow
and by the way when that number reaches
or certainly 18 19 you have a hard time
just getting around like you wouldn't be
able to walk up a flight of stairs
that gives you a sense of the of the
gradient now let's get to my point that
answers your question
you asked how can I say exercise is so
powerful well
what do you think is the hazard ratio
when I compare someone at the top two
and a half percent to someone at the
bottom 25 in terms of VO2 max yes
two percent versus the top bottom 25
bottom 25 that's quite big two percent
is quite narrow um I'd say
1.1.5 which is what so you think it's
less important than strength because
we've just established for strength it's
about three so I'm just I'm increasing
it now because I was so wrong on
strength yeah you see what I mean uh
well
what would I have said had you not told
me the strength one so
um by the way I think your guess is a
completely reasonable guess because the
answer is so absurd I'm gonna say 1.5
Hazard Hazard ratio it's five five which
means 400 percent difference in all
cause mortality
if you compare the fittest two and a
half percent to the least fit 25 percent
wow so it makes a huge difference
so this is why I can say with absolute
certainty nothing compares to exercise
nothing compares to having a high VO2
max High muscle mass and high muscle
strength
they are more beneficial for you than
any bad thing you can think of is bad
for you
why why the is the muscle mass piece so
important and the strength piece why is
that causing me to stay alive I think
there are several reasons as you get so
there's there's I put them in two
buckets structural and metabolic
let's start with the latter
muscles are where you dispose of glucose
so glucose regulation is one of the most
important metabolic functions of the
body
our ability to metabolize glucose and
regulate glucose levels is Central to
our existence on this planet and when we
get it just a little bit wrong we go to
hell in a hand basket that's what type 2
diabetes is type 2 diabetes raging type
2 diabetes
only means you have an extra
five grams of blood sugar one teaspoon
in your circulation that's it
the difference between you and someone
with type 2 diabetes so bad that they're
going to get their digits amputated
is an extra one teaspoon of glucose in
the bloodstream
that's how critical it is that we
regulate our blood sugar
and the most important part of blood
sugar regulation is having muscles that
are big enough to put the glucose into
and that are insulin sensitive enough to
respond to the signal of insulin
and glucose is stored in just a couple
of places in our body it's only stored
in the liver and in the muscles but the
muscles store 80 of it okay so okay so
muscles are really really good for
glucose regulation because it gives
the sugar more place to hide that's
right so the other reason muscle mass
and strength is so important is as we
age
fragility and Frailty become an enormous
liability in death
there's a figure in that book that shows
the mortality associated with falling
and it becomes
catastrophic once you hit the age of 65.
once you hit the age of 65 if you fall
which is pretty likely
and you break your hip or your femur the
long bone in your leg
there's a 15 to 30 percent chance you
will be dead within the next 12 months
really yes it's insane
because you become set a dream yeah
there's a lot of reasons for it but
certainly a loss of function is a big
one you can also just die as a result of
hitting your head you can die from a fat
embolism or a blood clot you can die
from sepsis you can die from you know
heart attack because you you know
there's there's so many things that can
kind of kill you in response to it but
even the people you know the 70 to 85
percent of people who don't die 50 of
them will experience a significant loss
of function that never recovers after
so this this issue of sarcopenia which
is loss of muscle mass and Frailty and
fragility become the you know the
absolute keeper of death for people once
they reach the seventh decade of life
again
if you're 30 years old it's impossible
to Fathom this stuff because you're
indestructible yeah yeah even at my age
I mean I feel indestructible and I'm 50
but this changes and we have to do all
we can to Ward it off so that's why
muscle mass matters so much
there's this kind of long-standing
belief that you as you age there's so
many just it's just kind of inevitable
you put on fat you know you slow down
and you're saying and I think you
communicated very clearly in the book
that it doesn't have to be inevitable
all of this stuff to some degree well I
mean look I I'm I'm very I'm very
careful to to try to be as realistic as
possible I I get a little put off when I
see people in this sort of quote-unquote
longevity space saying things that I
think are just science fiction right
like oh you're at 90 you can be just as
fit as you are at 40 and stuff and I I
see Zero evidence that that's happening
I don't see any biotechnology on the
horizon that is going to completely and
reversibly change aging
um yet
I don't think In Our Lifetime no and
this is something I spend
you know
an absurd amount of time on both as an
investor uh and and just as a you know a
person who thinks about this from my own
podcast and the types of guests that I
bring on and the type of science that
I'm paying attention to but but no I
really do not see anything in our
lifetime that is going to undo aging I
think we have some ideas of
places we can look right I think that
for example
if you could
completely restore the epigenome to what
it looks like in a young State across
the entire genome I think that could
have a profound effect
on function
but do we have do I see ways that we
could do that I
it you know it's a longer discussion but
I think the complexity there is many
many decades away that said
um what I think we do not need to do is
accept the complete and total
inevitability of Rapid decline so the
decline is non-linear
this is the important thing to
understand so what was your decline from
20 to 30.
wasn't that bad no no and from 30 to 40
it's not going to be that bad from 40 to
50 it's going to be more from 50 to 60
it's going to be even more from 60 to 70
it's going to be way more and 70 to 80
is falling off a cliff
so if you if you look at this is
actually one of the figures I wanted to
include in the book but you know you're
always sort of scrapped for space so we
took it out but I have a figure that
shows both muscle mass and spontaneous
physical activity in people by decade
and it's just based on like a huge data
sample of people and it's really
interesting to watch the correlation how
strong it is right so physical activity
and muscle mass go like this and they
just fall off a cliff and the cliff for
both is 75 for both men and women like
that's where you see an enormous
reduction in muscle mass and activity
level
because of Behavioral well I think it's
a you know it's the age-old question is
are they losing muscle mass because
they're becoming less active or are they
becoming less active because they're
losing muscle muscle mass and I think
it's both okay I think these two feed
off each other
and um and they get haunted right
presumably because what you said about
the quality of the muscle as well that's
right so you have to Ward this stuff off
right I mean as your type 2 muscle
fibers are deteriorating and you're
putting more fat into muscle the quality
of that muscle you go from being you
know primed to wagyu so you have to Ward
that stuff off
right and the way to Ward that off is to
lift very heavy things that's the only
way to stimulate the type 2 muscle fiber
this type 2 muscle fiber won't get
stimulated by light movements so it's
not just that resistance training is
necessary but it's it's resistance
training that's actually quite heavy
people who hear that they go okay they
get it they're on board they're going to
exercise how much do I need to do
because listen
can it be is it I've got to change my
whole life in exercise seven days a week
and run marathons now Dr Peter or is
this what would you recommend I always
start this question by saying
how much can you do
but okay I'm gonna I'm gonna play
devil's advocate here I'm gonna respond
as one of my viewers right I'm gonna say
listen I'm so busy you don't understand
Dr Peter I'm I've got kids I've got this
I've got a job I'm already I already
have no time I'm not sleeping out here
so I don't have any time
I mean I I it requires a thorough
discussion around that I mean is that
really true no of course it's not yeah
so then you have to get into the weeds
like how much time are you watching TV
how much time are you on social media
how much time are you doing things that
might not be
um as high a priority as doing this
other thing
um so so once you kind of get through
that I do I do sort of put put it on
them and say I would much rather you
tell me the number than I tell you the
number
I can tell you what I think the number
is right like if you're playing the
optimizing game and if you're saying
I want to be the absolute best fittest
version
of me that is humanly possible when I'm
in my 80s how much do I need to be
training for that the answer is probably
one and a half to two hours a day
one and a half to two hours a day seven
days a week yeah
I mean of course it's not going to be
the same every day and and it looks
different but but it's going to average
out to 10 to 14 hours a week
but but rather than tell somebody that
because I think that's very off-putting
yeah I would just say just tell me what
you got
if you tell me you've got five hours a
week that you can do this I'll give you
a great set of things you can do in five
hours and My Hope by the way is
six months from now you're gonna feel so
much better that you're gonna say you
know what I would like to up this to
seven hours a week
what's the difference in all cause
mortality if I go from doing zero
exercise to doing just a bit yeah that
that's a great question
and for some people that question is all
they need to get started
going from zero activity to just 90
minutes a week is about a 15 reduction
in all cause mortality so I'm 50 less
likely to to die in any given Year from
all causes if you go from being
completely sedentary to just doing 90
minutes a week
which is only like what I know 15
minutes a day 12 minutes a day yeah or
just you know three times 30 minutes a
week
that's a huge that's a huge shifting of
very important odds yeah
and and truthfully like I
probably spend more time convincing
people not on the all-cause mortality
data
but on the health spandex because people
don't we didn't think about it yeah
death is so abstract it really I don't
think it I don't think it even sets in
until you're in your 50s like I think
it's very
it's very hard to capture the finitude
of what it means to be a human when
you're young I think it's true at all
ages but but I really think
it's so much better to just focus on the
quality of life you want to live
what do you want to physically be able
to do throughout your life
and it's easier in people who have been
around aging people
yeah you know which again
a lot of people in their 30s their
parents aren't even necessarily old
enough that they can fully appreciate it
they might have to think well do I still
remember what my grandparents were like
at the end of their life and
was I inspired by them and if so that's
what I want to do great and if I don't
want what they had which is the answer I
think most people will have then what do
I need to do to be different what was it
for you I remember what it was for me
yeah for me it's again it's I didn't
know my grandparents uh
I suspect just my training in medicine
like I was around
so many people at the end of life that
like to see yeah it was it was just
imprinted early my arm I told this story
once or twice in this podcast before but
I was in Bali walking down some a long
set of stairs when I say alongside of
stairs I mean down the side of a cliff
going down to canoe with my partner and
I was walking down those stairs in the
sunshine it dawned on me that my father
probably couldn't walk down these steps
and my dad is maybe a 60 65 and I
thought he wouldn't be able to come down
these stairs which means he wouldn't be
able to go canoeing with his family and
we share a lot of genetic uh information
me and my father of course so that was
one of those real big moments and
actually Jack who films the podcast he
he after I shared that with him he and
we had some guests on the podcast
um he shared with me his own moment
where he was climbing a mountain I think
last month weren't you Jack
and he he got to the top of the mountain
and thought to himself God like it was
such an unbelievable experience for him
uh he correct me if I'm wrong it was an
epiphany moment you go I wouldn't be
able to climb this bloody mountain with
all these people and feel this sense of
accomplishment if I and it's those
moments for me where I thought this
is that's my health span I want to be
able to do this yes
you wrote one of the chapters in your
book is about stability um
found that really
um surprising again I'd never even come
across the concept of stability or why
it's important that's why it needed an
entire chapter because it is a very
foreign concept chapter 13 stability why
why is it important and what does it
mean yeah I think this is this is the
stability is a difficult thing to
explain I mean you can sort of talk
about it technically right stability is
the capacity to transmit force from the
body to the outside world and from the
outside world back to the body without
injury so anytime you're taking a step
you're applying Force to the ground
that's
what's allowing you to walk forward so
you apply Force to the ground the ground
applies an equal opposite Force to you
that's Newton's law and you move forward
um when you're running why are you going
faster
you're going faster primarily because
you're applying more Force to the ground
and therefore the ground is applying
more Force to you and that's propelling
you forward
the difference between me and Usain Bolt
among other things is his capacity to
apply Force to the ground is
two and a half times my ability to apply
Force to the ground
so in all that Force
how do you make sure that the action of
the force mechanism is all for the
desired purpose in this case propulsion
and not for undesirable purposes like
leaking of energy which is what it feels
like when your knee hurts when you're
walking down the stairs or your hip or
something like that
so the analogy I use in the book to
describe this is that of a car because I
love cars and I talk about the
difference between a race car and a
street car
a race car can be even half the power of
A Streetcar in terms of horsepower
but because it's smaller lighter and has
a stiffer chassis and slick tires
much more of its power is being
delivered directly to the road without
slippage or energy loss and therefore
it's going faster
and so this idea is a very important
part of aging so most people who have
some sort of chronic injury it can
really be traced back to an instability
whether it be an instability of their
scapula and that's why they really have
tennis elbow or an instability in the
you know in in their abdomen in their
lower back and that's why they have back
pain instability in the feet that
translates its way up into knee pain all
of these things matter greatly and a big
part of how we train is making sure that
we do exercises that bolster our
stability
again this feels very um relevant to me
because I'm
currently got a Grade Three tear in my
hamstring got a growing problem so I'm
on physio for the grade three tear how
did you tear it
um playing football but I have a couple
of suspicions surrounding it because
about a month before I got the
foot pain that they call plantar
fasciitis plantar fasciitis so I went to
the I think it's called a podiatrist and
I got my foot x-ray things done where
they give you the insoles and then
following that I got loads of injuries
um I think my hypothesis is that I took
these insoles put them straight in and
then proceeded to do two hours of
football basically running a day and I
think something in me just broke because
I suddenly got all these injuries and
then I was meant to be playing Old
Trafford Manchester United's football
ground in front of 70 000 people and the
day before in training I got I pulled my
hamstring
um and I and I and I think that
everyone's been speaking to me about my
injury and saying well you know maybe it
was something in your lower back and
maybe this and maybe your feet weren't
whatever
um kind of rings true to what you're
saying about stability I clearly have
something which is not wasn't wasn't
prepared for me to suddenly start
training for two hours a day
um
and everything started breaking
well and look I mean it's it's
hamstring injuries are very stubborn
injuries
um and a lot of people are really
imbalanced right much stronger quads
than hamstrings
um my personal take is and I'm sure I'm
going to really upset some podiatrists
here I think that
um that insoles foot inserts uh arches
arch support
probably should be reserved only for
some people and most people actually
need to learn to strengthen the
intrinsic muscles of the foot and that
that's the issue that's underpinning the
plantar fasciitis and once you have a
Str Because by the way your foot is not
that much different from your hand in
terms of the amount of musculature in it
and yet if you think about the dexterity
that you have with your hands and the
strength that you have in your hands I
think you'd be surprised at how weak
your feet are and I don't just mean you
I'm not singling you out I think this is
true for most of us because shoes really
Shield us so much from what our feet
should be doing
so
um yeah I think I think your hypothesis
is actually probably spot on and I think
what you really need to do is strengthen
your feet so that your arches
can can self-support
um and that you can sort of regain the
springiness that is that is within your
feet I spoke to Dr Daniel Lieberman
about this yeah yeah he said the same
thing yeah he said your feet were too
weak and it makes perfect sense to me
because I do not think about I always
think in terms of my ancestors and I
think my ancestors didn't walk in these
cushioned blunts Yaga shoes they were
out Barefoot yeah building up the
strength and so when I went from my
cushioned balenciagas to suddenly
training two hours a day on feet that
just didn't have the muscles of course I
I pulled loads of I had all these issues
and so I actually changed my Footwear
and I don't have the insoles anymore and
I'm now using those Vivo Barefoot yep do
you recommend those do you think I do I
really I mean again I think there's lots
of companies that make them I wear a
brand called zero like x-e-r-o
um and and but the Vivo barefoot's a
great brand and I yeah I think that a
minimalist shoe is a great way to go I I
have the luxury of basically working
from home so I'm pretty much Barefoot 24
7. I I work out Barefoot and my own gym
like I I'm I'm in my and then when I do
my activities like my rucking and stuff
like that when I'm Outdoors like I'm you
know I'm in a wide toed shoe that is uh
you know at most would have maybe an
eight millimeter uh
um increase in heel but yes minimalist
shoe now one thing to keep in mind is if
you're transitioning from Big shoe to
minimalist shoe don't do it all at once
so
um you can also injure yourself in the
right shoes if it's too much too soon
they did say that to me when I bought
them yeah they said just like sort of
ease yourself in because you need to
build up the muscles in your feet super
interesting no one's ever spoken to me
about this before but
um I just find it saying I'm like why
did anybody tell me this I mean we do a
lot of things if you think about it like
think of all the things we do to kids at
such a young age that set them down the
wrong path right like we put them in big
shoes when they're little we put them in
desks to sit down in class and we take
away a lot of physical activity Comfort
we prescribe Comfort to everything yeah
convenience have you read the Comfort
crisis by Michael Easter no oh man such
a such a fantastic book
and it talks about this oh yeah I mean
it's really the whole thesis of the book
right is that we have engineered
discomfort completely out of our lives
and uh it's a you know it's an enormous
problem
both for our physical and mental health
the answers are actually quite simple
when you reflect upon it you go you know
how are we born to live we're so far
away from how we were born to live and
if I just followed more of
um the instruction manual of my
ancestors maybe I wouldn't have all of
these kind of
you know modern issues with that comfort
in many many respects has caused me
but it's tough because you have to sort
of think about what is the
there are a lot of gifts that come from
the modern world right and like I don't
think you would want to go back in time
100 years and be alive I probably
wouldn't live very long would I either
yeah I mean and let's let's even make it
less than that like let's say even 70
years like you know once we're through
the sort of infectious pandemic stuff
right like what you know would we really
want to go back and be alive 70 years
ago just before World War II I mean I I
wouldn't like I yeah they had
electricity and stuff but I I like the
modern world but there's a huge set of
responsibilities that comes with the
modernity of our world today
food is so abundant today I mean these
people did not struggle with obesity
because they weren't surrounded by
really tasty hyper hyper palatable
calorie dense food in total excess we
are
that means we have to exercise some
moderation
most of them had far more physical jobs
than you and I do
I mean
you and I don't have to lift a finger to
make a living
whereas 75 years ago we probably did
and it's great that we don't have to I
think you could argue look you're having
a far bigger impact on the world than
you would have ever had 75 years ago but
that comes with a responsibility to
yourself is this one I was seeing this
sort of resurgence of discomfort as a
hobby and a sport in an industry I think
so yeah I I think so and and again
Michael writes about this so
um so well you know they write about he
writes about things called musogi's
which are these very very difficult
challenging things that you might have
yourself do once a year
um he also writes a lot about something
that is just an enormous hobby of mine
called rucking have you are you familiar
with rucking so rucking is something
that I I think it was probably started
by the military and it's really how the
military does the great majority of its
conditioning and it's walking with a
weighted backpack
um and I mean the military will do this
they might go on a 24-hour Ruck where
you're carrying half your body weight
so picture you carrying in your case
right like close to a hundred pounds on
your back for a day
and
um so there's actually an awesome
company in the U.S called go rock that
makes really good rucksacks that are
just ergonomically designed to put
weight plates into and then they sell
these plates and stuff so I mean this
has become a total Obsession of mine so
I rock three or four times every week
and luckily where I live in Austin Texas
it's incredibly hilly so it's just up
and down up and down very steep hills
and I'll go anywhere from you know 50 60
pounds on some days I'll really push it
and go up to a hundred uh for shorter
rucks and you know I'm only doing it for
like an hour at a time but we it's very
hot where I live in the summer so it's
just it adds an extra layer of
discomfort but it's great
yeah because I don't know whether it was
just what the circle I'm exposed to in
the information I'm exposed to but it
just seems like all of these Ultra
athletic you know painful long distance
um Sports have become super popular the
Spartans of the you know I actually just
recently invested in one
um because of this very reason because
I'm seeing this Comfort crisis and I
always think that when there's one one
pole Rises the other one Also Rises so
when digital music record you know old
school vinyl records became big and I
think in a world of comfort people are
going to seek out extreme discomfort and
it sounds like you're doing that with
your rucking yeah if you've been
listening to this podcast over the last
few months you'll know that we're
sponsored and supported by Airbnb but it
amazes me how many people don't realize
they could actually be sitting on their
very own Airbnb for me as someone who
works away a lot it just makes sense to
Airbnb my place at home whilst I'm away
if your job requires you to be away from
home for extended periods of time why
leave your home empty you can so easily
turn your home into an Airbnb and let it
generate income for you whilst you're on
the road whether you could use a little
extra money to cover some bills or for
something a little bit more fun your
home might just be worth more than you
think and you can find out how much it's
worth at Airbnb dot code UK slash host
that's airbnb.co.uk slash host sugar is
it an interesting topic because it's
really been demonized I think and may
maybe rightfully so but
um I wanted to talk to you about sugar
because it's actually been really front
of mind for me lately and when I say A
little I mean literally in the last 48
hours I'm I went away to a a wedding
um and I remember they didn't have a lot
of drinks so I was opting for the
sugar-free drinks the things that say no
added sugar in them like you know I
won't name the brands but the ones that
have zero and diet on them
first question is
is sugar the devil as people have become
to tell me and also if I'm drinking
these zero drinks with the diet and the
zero on it am I in the clear
this is a very complicated topic and I
think it's one that's also very
contentious
and it's also one in which I've probably
my thinking has probably also evolved as
as as the science I think has kind of
evolved so
let's start with what I don't think
anybody disputes I don't think there's
any anybody out there thinking that high
sugar foods are somehow nutritious right
that's not the question at hand
the question is
calorie for calorie
is sugar somehow different from let's
just limit it to other sources of
carbohydrates
so
what is sugar so I'm assuming when
you're talking about sugar you're
talking about sucrose or high fructose
corn syrup those would be the two
dominant forms of sugar but just to
demystify it sucrose which is the white
powder you would put in your coffee or
tea that's just one molecule of glucose
and one molecule of fructose stuck
together that's table sugar
and if you contrast that with pure
glucose so like eating rice is basically
pure glucose it's going to be broken
down into pure glucose how different are
they well obviously the thing that
differentiates them is the fructose
that's the thing that's different now
it's true that fructose has a very
different Pathway to be metabolized
the body breaks down fructose in a very
different way from the way it breaks
down glucose and by breaks down I mean
it gets energy from it the whole purpose
of eating is to make this thing called
ATP ATP is the currency of life it's the
currency by which energy is transmitted
throughout the body
and the way we make ATP out of glucose
is
I think I can probably say this smarter
than the way we make it out of fructose
the way we make it out of fructose has a
problem a slight problem now it doesn't
really matter if you're not consuming a
lot of fructose
but if you're consuming fructose in a
liquid form it has a real problem I.E if
you are drinking sugar
there's a real problem
and the problem is this when you make
ATP out of fructose you temporarily
deplete the cell of energy to the point
where more energy is needed
this is just a consequence of the speed
at which we metabolize fructose
we do it quickly all the time in this
way but if you're eating an apple for
example it's not really an issue because
yes the Apple has fructose in it
but you know it's not that it's not that
much and you're eating it so it's it's a
piece of solid food with fiber and water
that's taking a long time to exit your
stomach but if you drink a big glass of
apple juice
well I mean first of all that's much
more fructose and it's liquid and it's
just going straight out of your stomach
and your liver is going to encounter it
much sooner as is your gut
and therefore you're much more likely to
want to eat more
after in other words it creates more of
a hunger response
so the real issue with sugar is calorie
for calorie is it more damaging than
just glucose
I actually think the answer to that
question is probably not
really yeah but
in the real world
is that possible
in other words if I put you in a
metabolic ward in a hospital where you
had no control over what you ate other
than me putting it in front of you and I
gave you two different diets and one was
higher in fructose than the other I'm
not convinced it would make that much of
a difference
it's possible it would if we went to
extremes you know maybe at a high enough
fructose level we might actually induce
more fat production in the liver we
might actually create some fatty liver
disease maybe even drive insulin
resistance
um but I might have to go pretty high on
that but
the real problem is if I just let you
have as much fructose and sugar as you
wanted you'd probably end up overeating
in response to this energy depletion
thing
so
I don't sort of describe myself as like
a hardcore sugar avoider I mean
like we're here in London and I mean I'm
gonna have dessert probably most nights
right I'm on vacation
um
but I also acknowledge it that it's you
know like not something that I want to
be eating on a regular basis you know
just added sugar all the time
um
I don't drink sugar sweetened beverages
that's definitely a place where I draw a
line so I think there's something about
liquid sugar that is more problematic
than solid sugar
um so I'd rather eat my sugar
and at least have the benefit of it
being more slowly absorbed than drink it
um what's always diet drinks though yeah
so I look I don't drink them personally
very often
um and in part that's I think due to
a little bit of uncertainty I think we
still have about their impact on our
metabolism through our gut
I think there's
I think there were emerging
data that suggests that
at least certain non-nutritive
sweeteners like things like
um well in the U.S it's like NutraSweet
I think
it's Aspartame is the underlying agent
or saccharine or sucralose I think
there's some
some suggestion that the effect that
they have on the bacteria on your gut
might be detrimental to your health I
think it's too soon to really say that
but my view is
don't take the risk well I don't need to
I suppose like I'm I'm I love soda water
like I love carbonated water so I'm just
happy to drink that but I'm sure once a
month I'm gonna have a Diet Coke or
something but it's not a regular thing
but I but I will say this when I see
people who are struggling for example
with weight loss
and they're drinking four Diet Cokes a
day
one of the first things I'll do is have
them stop completely and replace that
with just water or sparkling water why
uh I'm not sure I I just empirically
have seen even though they're not
getting any calories that a either it's
impacting their eating behavior when
they're not drinking the coke uh or
maybe it's having some negative impact
on their gut that is that is impacting
the way they're metabolizing their food
this is this is rather unscientific at
this point but it's just empirically is
something I've observed everyone cares
about weight loss
it's such a big topic everyone wants to
lose weight I mean as you clearly
um
specify people want to lose fat they
don't want to lose weight people want
lose fat which is something I heard you
say
um what are the the biggest
misconceptions in your mind about weight
loss because but I guess the narrative
is to lose weight you kind of you just
need to eat less that's kind of the
is that true and what are the big
misconceptions that you hear that we
need to overcome yeah I think that is
largely true I think that
um eating less
uh is the the more important step
towards weight loss
um and that the role of exercise is
important but less because of just the
straight number of calories you burn in
other words the increase in energy that
you expend through exercise is usually
offset by increased appetite you use the
word calories there yeah contentious
words sometimes
it shouldn't be people people come and
come on this podcast and told me that
calories are like the concept of it's
kind of like a lie in the sense that
they're not all even some cat you know a
stick of celery has this many calories
and then when you boil it has this many
calories and it's
well yeah I think people tend to
get a little off in the Weeds on stuff
that that might not matter that much
um
yeah it's certainly true that not all
calories
um are absorbable the same way and an
example of celery is a pretty extreme
example because so much of celery is
um an insoluble fiber right so most of
the mass of celery is water and
insoluble fiber there are virtually no
calories in celery
um but at the end of the day it's not
rocket science to figure out how many
calories you're ingesting in a certain
amount of food and the truth of it is if
a person wants to lose weight as you
said what they really want to do is lose
fat Mass there's I've never met anybody
out there who says I want to have less
muscle so we want to have less fat and
therefore we have to create an energy
deficit
um
now there are other elements to this
that matter so we don't we just want to
leave on the side that if you're sleep
deprived you're going to be very insulin
resistant
it's that's a much easier path to being
overweight
not sleeping not sleeping right so you
you can't correct a weight problem
without correcting a sleep problem what
about a stress problem yep that's even
harder to correct because it's harder to
measure
but yes hypercortisolemia high stress
makes it very difficult to lose weight
my partner said this to me this weekend
she was trying to figure out how in one
stage of her life when she was in her
words eating very very healthy food she
says I still wasn't losing weight and
she she hypothesized in the car as we
were driving that she thought it might
be to do with her stress levels at that
time in her life and I remember thinking
oh that's an interesting hypothesis
yeah so high stress poor sleep
inactivity all of those things will make
it very difficult to lose weight even in
the presence of whatever perfect diet
you're on so those things have to be
addressed right you have to be sleeping
well you have to be active because
activity increases insulin sensitivity
and we want those muscles to be
sensitive to insulin so that they
quickly get glucose out of circulation
and also exercise increases the
sensitivity of your brain to what are
called satiety hormones the hormones
that tell you when to stop eating
so and and the difference between an
exercising person and a non-exercising
person uh is that that non-exercising
person has a blunted response to those
hormones so sometimes they're eating
when they don't need to be eating
they're not getting the message that
says we have enough nutrition on board
now anybody can blow through that signal
but I would like to know that that
signal is there
so when all of that is said the question
then becomes how do you create an energy
deficit
and basically
there are three ways to do it
there are three strategies to create an
energy deficit
I'd describe them as CR Dr TR so that
stands for calorie restriction
dietary restriction and time restriction
so let's explain them okay so calorie
restriction is what it sounds like just
eat less that's the most direct way to
go about doing this
so you know I gotta eat 500 fewer
calories a day and I'm gonna have to
track what I'm eating and count my
macros and make that happen Okay that
has the advantage of being the most
direct way to do this but it has a
disadvantage frankly of
being harder to do in some ways you have
to pay the most attention to it it also
has the advantage by the way of being
pretty flexible and agnostic to what you
eat so
you know there are certain foods you
like
there's no food that's off the table
when you're doing calorie restriction it
provided you're eating less overall got
a friend that said this to me he said it
doesn't matter what you eat just
restrict the calories remember thinking
that was strange advice because he was
like you can have Domino's Pizza every
day you just if you'll lose weight if
you have less calories that's right now
the problem is he's absolutely right but
the problem is
it can be very difficult
to not suffer through calorie
restriction if you're just eating crap
because the body still at the end of the
day keeps score with respect to
nutrition
and the body still wants protein the
body still wants nutrients the body
still wants vitamins minerals so if you
say look I'm going to eat 2 000 calories
a day a Cadbury's
you might lose weight but you'll
probably be in purgatory along the way
and you certainly won't be healthy so we
also want to make sure we're not
confusing health and weight here
now we come to dietary restriction
dietary restriction is what most people
think of when they think of a diet this
means
as I described in the book you know pick
your favorite Boogeyman
or two and just cut them out of the diet
so basically everybody that's arguing
about their perfect diet is arguing
about dietary restriction so you want to
take out carbs you want to take out
animal products you want to take out
everything but meat you know it's a
carnivore diet you want to go South
Beach paleo Mediterranean those are all
just forms of dietary restriction
and
generally speaking the more restrictive
you are in the diet the less you will
eat
so I mean it's I don't think it's an
accident that people who go on a
carnivore diet typically lose a ton of
weight same is true of a ketogenic diet
I did it yeah my scales it was like this
this was the it was a it was a
horizontal line my weight maybe a little
bit up and then I did keto for eight
weeks and it was a vertical line down
every time I hit those scales and the
Bluetooth thing sent to my weight to my
phone this vertical line down I lost a
stone in the space of those eight weeks
roughly my girlfriend was like stone is
16 pounds something like that yeah eight
kilos 14 step what do they go from 14
Stone 5 to 14 Stone 8 to 13 stone eight
yeah which I think yeah
and were you hungry
um I couldn't sustain it easily I'd say
that because if we went to restaurants
and stuff I was always trying to get
like taking corn out of it like taking
the wrap off a burrito and stuff and
um whatever else um was I hungry after I
got past the first week I wouldn't say I
was hungry no but I also didn't find it
sustainable because of honestly because
of the nature of the modern world where
it's so hard to find those things when
you're living a very fast-paced life
hungry for some kind of nutrient maybe I
think there was some kind of
psychological calling to go back to work
to my previous diet and then I went to
New York and that's when it fell down
and then did you regain the weight or
what happened oh yes
oh yes just as fast as I lost it I went
from this keto diet to the New York diet
and it was so extreme how quickly I put
that weight back on again
um just being honest yeah well it's
interesting right so I again it's a very
extreme diet and I think you know people
are gonna definitely lose lose weight on
it and and look for some people it's
easy to sustain for others it's not
um but nevertheless that's dietary
restriction and again I think the
advantage of dietary restriction is
you're not being restricted in the
amount you eat you're just being
restricted in what you eat and
um The Challenge then really comes down
to the craving of certain types of foods
so obviously on a ketogenic diet you're
going to really crave carbohydrates
um yeah so the final strategy is time
restriction and people call this
intermittent fasting as well but it's
basically saying all right how about I
create a smaller window in which I eat
so
I'm just going to allow myself to eat
you know from noon to 8 PM or 2 P.M to 8
PM or 2 P.M to 6 p.m and the narrower
and narrower you make that window the
more likely it is that you will induce a
significant caloric deficit and
therefore you will lose weight what do
you think of fasting G fast not anymore
uh at least not deliberately uh I mean I
sometimes end up fasting just by the
nature of whatever I'm doing but um
again fasting has a lot of advantages
it's conceptually the easiest by far I
think it is just the easiest to execute
on and because for most people it's just
easy to not eat for a period of time and
then have no restriction when they are
eating
um I think the biggest challenge of
fasting comes down to protein intake and
protein is in my view obviously I write
about this in the book The most
important macronutrient the one we need
to be paying the most attention to and
when you are intermittently fasting
it is very difficult to get the right
amount of protein in and in the right
Doses and therefore it's the most
difficult to maintain muscle mass and we
always have to remember that
you know if we're losing weight we still
want to be able to maintain muscle mass
we want to just lose fat mass and not
lose both I'm fasting as we speak
um I haven't eaten today yet and it's I
think it's just after six the reason for
that is because before this podcast I
realized that if I eat before I have a
conversation my brain doesn't work
it feels like and I'm having spoken to
some experts the energy rushes to my gut
so I can't I can't speak as well and I
can't think as well so I ordered the
food just before you got here and then I
said to my sister I can't eat it and
within an hour of you so I'll eat it
after but
yeah and the health benefits are one
thing but the cognitive impact as well
has been quite quite big for me
um
so you don't fast
no no I used to fast a lot I mean I used
to do days and days at a time alcohol
another thing I wanted to talk to you
about I'm thinking of quitting
what is the um what is the advice from a
doctor like yourself about alcohol and
do you drink I do
it's a very interesting topic so I and
it's so long that I I don't want to I
don't want to spend another hour on this
because I'm sure that's not the answer
anyone is looking for
I will say this
um alcohol ethanol which is the alcohol
we drink is toxic
um its toxicity is non-linear so its
toxicity kind of goes like this meaning
at low levels it's just a little bit of
an increase but the more you drink the
more it becomes toxic so
um you know for most people there's not
an appreciable amount of toxicity at one
drink a day but you know two three
drinks a day starts to become quite
toxic
but there is no dose of ethanol that is
helpful
so the question becomes why is there so
much epidemiology out there suggesting
the benefits of modest alcohol intake so
there's this thing in the alcohol
research field called the J curve the J
curves a picture A J curve for all cause
mortality it means that at total
abstinence mortality is here but as you
drink a little bit the mortality goes
down before it really Rises sharply as
you increase the drinking that's what
the epidemiology shows and it goes down
well again epidemiology is fraught with
many limitations especially epidemiology
of nutrition okay it's much worse than
the epidemiology of say exercise or
infectious diseases
and
proponents of alcohol argue that and
they might be right to some extent that
there are some pro-social benefits of
alcohol alcohol at least in the form of
red wine is also potentially something
that comes with some antioxidants and
things of that nature
my view is that that literature is
highly flawed and that that literature
is confounded by a negative survivorship
bias and it's confounded by the fact
that net that non-drinkers often have a
health reason for being a non-drinker
and in other words there are people who
are completely not drinking because of a
health reason that's forcing them to be
not drinking and people who drink and
die as a result of it dilute the pool of
data that we have of the toxic effects
of alcohol As Time Marches forward so
it's a long-winded way of saying I think
anybody who's thinking about not
drinking should absolutely engage in
that there's no health benefit to be
drinking
um you asked me if I drink the answer is
I do
um but I don't drink if it sucks like in
other words
there has to be a good reason for me to
drink so my my sort of Mantra is don't
drink on airplanes like they always just
have crap alcohol what's the point right
like if I'm going to drink
if I'm gonna have a glass of wine it has
to be really good I don't have a hard
time opening a bottle of wine that I
bought and deciding actually I don't
like it that much and pouring it down
the sink I'm not gonna drink it because
it's there
um
so that's that's kind of how I think
about it now there are a couple of
rules I think that make drinking less
toxic so rule number one is really try
not to have more than one drink in a day
and definitely not more than two
the hard rule there for me second is I
do not want to be drinking more than
three hours or less than three hours
before bed
in other words I do not want alcohol to
negatively impact my sleep which it has
a devastating consequence of my sleep so
if I'm going to drink I want I'd rather
have a cocktail early than drink into
the wee hours of the night
sleep's really important to you isn't it
for sure super important to meso and
life-changing this little weep thing
yeah yeah I see that I've actually
changed my life and you've probably
noticed how your whoop score changes
with and without alcohol
and it's all flashing red and it's the
first time that happened I had one glass
of wine and I woke up the next day and
my my Vital Signs my heart rate
variability was flashing red and it
literally says did you have a drink last
night it changed my life yeah it changed
my life forever and honestly I'm
absolutely obsessed with sleep in a very
healthy way some people think oh that's
you know you might be waking up and
feeling bad no I look at it and if I've
not slept well I'll adjust my day
accordingly
um you share some stats around sleeping
in the book what are what it what is the
stat or the two stats that changed your
perspective on sleeping or that really
you would you would tell someone if
you're trying to convince them of the
importance of sleep
it's so interesting I'll tell you it's
not even a stat I think it's more of it
almost goes back to the type of
discussion you'd have with somebody like
a Daniel Lieberman right thinking about
this through the lens of our ancestors
so
um I I was always someone who
de-prioritized sleep
um you know very busy person uh high
energy didn't really seem to need that
much of it even in high school uh was
sort of always go go and
um you know at one point I was sort of
having a discussion with a with a
colleague about sleep and I was making
the argument that like I didn't really
need any of it you know and
um
I almost you know made a point like it's
almost a shame we can't just work our
way out of it and he sort of posed to me
in a very Socratic way
well you know given how
evolutionarily
unwise sleep would be right you are
unconscious for a third of your life and
me we know that our ancestors slept on
an average of about seven to eight hours
every 24 hours they didn't do it always
straight away but we know that they're
sleeping basically a third of their life
um that's a time when you can't forage
for food you can't defend yourself
against predators you're not mating like
there's nothing from an evolutionary
perspective you're doing those are the
three highest priorities of evolution
and you're not doing them why would
Evolution have kept this thing around
like and by the way why has no species
figured out a way out of it
and I think through that lens I was sort
of like huh
yeah interesting maybe this thing does
matter
so in some ways I think that's probably
one of the most powerful things that you
can hear
um and sure there are lots of statistics
about how fragmented sleep broken sleep
or short sleep can increase your risk in
particular of cardiovascular disease and
dementia I think there's a less clear
relationship to cancer but I think the
relationship is quite clear to
cardiovascular disease and dementia in
addition to insulin resistance and
obviously therefore weight gain so for
people even if you're just coming at
this through the lens of of of weight or
or excess body fat I mean that's
probably motivation enough for many
people and then of course there's how
you feel and how you perform and your
creativity and your ability to
articulate yourself which I notice in
your mood huge one for me especially
when you're running teams
unslept days in my worst days
um the last thing I wanted to ask you
about was just again a conversation I've
had with my friends recently when I say
my friends I mean this group of my five
best mates and different voices in in
the group about hormone replacement
therapy and one of my friends in
particular is very keen on it he says
that when we get older we should all
take I think testosterone I think it's
trt
um because it will help us in all these
different ways and I've sat here and
spoken to people about menopause as well
and
um the hormone therapy you can take when
you when you go through menopause what
is your position on on taking these
um hormone replacement therapies to
improve our
Health span and our emotional state Etc
yeah I think um it's a long discussion
but I have a lot of podcasts on this
topic because I think it's so
misunderstood
um
you know we have a lot of data on the
use of testosterone replacement therapy
in men and while I think it is generally
over prescribed and I think generally at
least in the U.S men are receiving trt
far too early in their lives
um
I think the the data for responsible use
of trt uh are very positive so uh the
risk uh you know again historically the
risk would be increased risk of prostate
cancer increased risk of heart disease
those have not borne out again at
physiologic doses a very low risk
proposition that comes with many
benefits uh most notably of course being
benefits of body composition but also
insulin sensitivity
um I think the cognitive benefits are a
little more controversial not entirely
clear that testosterone replacement
therapy preserves cognition as we age
but it hasn't been studied perfectly so
it's I think that's a bit of a TBD
as far as estrogen and progesterone
replacement therapy or hormone
replacement therapy for women I think
this is unfortunately a very
controversial topic that shouldn't be uh
I think it's anybody who's really
scrutinizes the literature here as
opposed to just chooses to believe what
they were told
um has to come away believing that it's
a net positive for women especially
women who are symptomatic right so women
who are having hot flashes and night
sweats as they're going through
menopause they benefit enormously from
hormone replacement therapy and in the
case of HRT for women the estrogen is so
important as it protects their bone
density so women really go through this
risk of osteopenia and osteoporosis when
they go through menopause because their
bones get weaker in response to estrogen
loss so being able to restore that is is
so important and then of course you have
all of the sexual side effects of
menopause as well that are ameliorated
by estrogen another thing that hasn't
been
yet completely well studied but I think
is becoming increasingly of interest in
the United States is the use of
testosterone replacement therapy in
women as well so most people don't
associate testosterone with women but
it's actually a very interesting
statistic that women have 10 times more
testosterone in them than they do
estrogen
it's just that estrogen is the dominant
hormone for their sexual characteristics
so we mostly just think about their
estrogen and progesterone but we should
never ignore their testosterone because
a it's ten times more abundant than
their estrogen even though it's
1 20th as abundant as it is in a male
but it still plays an important role in
muscle mass mood and libido and sexual
function orgasmic function all sorts of
things so we think a ton about all of
these hormones in our patients and um
I think
um you know you just have to make sure
that if you're going down that path
you're doing it with a doctor who really
understands it because there are some
real big mistakes that can get made
especially in young men who end up on a
high dose of testosterone and they
haven't been told that hey by the way
you know a couple years into this if
you're on a high dose of testosterone
you're going to lose the ability to make
your own
and you're not going to be able to make
sperm either really you can imagine
imagine being 30 having you know some
Doc in a box puts you on a boatload of
testosterone and then when you're 35
you're like yeah I think me and my wife
want to have kids and you're like nope
that's not happening
wow so there's one has to be one has to
know what they're doing because there
are ways to give other hormones that
preserve fertility and things like that
I'm super scared of all this stuff you
know I'm super scared of messing with
the chemical balance of my body uh it's
my default is is I don't even take like
what you call it like penicillin if I'm
if I have excruciating pain somewhere in
my body I won't take any medicine
because I'm because I always ask myself
the question what's the cost there's
always a cost somewhere and I don't
think we think about that enough and one
of the things obviously happening at
this chapter of my life is my hair is
going to recede
and I'm watching as my friends will
battle this in their own ways some of
them are doing the testosterone shampoo
some of them are taking pills for it I
am I've surrendered it's going back I
don't care because I'm too scared to
mess with my chemicals I don't want my
libido to go I don't want to not be
opportunity actually I'll just share one
last interesting story with you so there
is um the most common drugs that are the
most common pills that are used for
treating that are called five Alpha
reductase Inhibitors so again I don't
know what their names are in the UK but
in the in the U.S the two drugs are
finasteride and dutasteride for receding
hairlines yeah okay so these are drugs
that block the conversion of
testosterone to a more much more potent
Androgen called dihydrotestosterone DHT
so testosterone gets turned into DHT by
an enzyme called five Alpha reductase
DHT is the hormone that's driving hair
loss so understandably if you take a
drug that blocks that enzyme you will
make less DHT you will have less hair
loss
um and these drugs do work but
a relatively small but not insignificant
number of men
who take these drugs have awful side
effects and the scariest part is it
appears that a subset of those men do
not
lose the side effect even if they stop
taking the drug and the side effects are
very sexual right so these are you know
difficulty achieving orgasm loss of
libido
um and and you know so it's a very
controversial topic
um but I think it's something that we
definitely want to make sure men are
aware of when they're taking high doses
of these hormones
that is exactly why I'm not taking them
I'm just always scared I have that
default man messing with the chemicals
in my body there's no free lunch in life
is there your book is amazing
um your book is really really amazing
um very very comprehensive you took many
many many many many many many many many
years to write it and it's really an
amalgamation of all of your insights
your podcasts your your Genius and your
lived experience and your perspective
it's a wonderful wonderful book that I
highly recommend anybody who's
interested in the subject map we've
talked about today
going goes and gets there's so much more
that we could have talked about in there
if anybody wants the more and more
detail and all the stuff we've talked
about the book is the place to go we
have a closing tradition on this podcast
where the last guest leaves a question
for the for the next guest not knowing
who they're going to leave it for
um and I don't get to read it until I
open the book so the question that was
left for you by Our Last guest they
don't know who they're leaving it for so
um
this is also the longest question I've
ever seen in this new age of AI when
Humanity has logic
machines that will outlogic humans how
are you going to help Humanity lead with
love what is your purpose as a human in
a world where AI is contributing to life
hmm
I think my answer is going to be very
uninteresting because I have relatively
low
um
expectations that my life will matter
that much in the new world so I think
that the most important impact I will
have is on my kids I think this is
probably more about the world my kids
will inherit and therefore I think the
most important thing I can do is ensure
that my kids are
um as well adjusted as possible
um and as curious as intellectually
curious as possible and so whatever I
can do to sow those seeds is probably
going to have a better impact on the
humanity of the world than anything I
would do
thank you
thank you so much thank you for writing
this book and taking giving me so much
of your time I really really appreciate
that and you've helped me to answer some
really important questions in my life
that are genuinely really really
important and obviously my job then is I
go on and do this podcast forever and
I'm going to continue to harvest all of
that wisdom and share it with everybody
and and take that forward so thank you
so much for your generosity there um
it's an amazing book you have a great
podcast as well highly recommend
everyone can check this book out outlive
by Dr Peter an amazing book thank you so
much thank you very much really enjoyed
it
[Music]
I'm someone that understands probably
from doing this podcast the importance
of having Greens in my diet but do I
achieve that every week in the chaos of
my life do I achieve that sometimes the
answer is no with heels Daily Greens the
probability of me achieving that is now
almost 100 because of its convenience
and because of the ease of preparing
this one scoop
10 second Shake
and you're ready to go this is
the best product that he'll have
released in recent times many of you
will think of alternatives to this but I
I've tried those Alternatives and none
of them are as tasty as fuel's Daily
Greens it was out of stock because of
the demand it's now back in stock for
everybody in the USA right now it's not
available in the UK but when you get a
chance just try it that's all I'm gonna
say
just try it and I think once you try it
you'll understand why this is such an
essential part of my life right now and
will probably
become an essential part of yours
[Music]
oh